Proposal for Pre-minted Vouchers (#4)
bosonprotocol/BPIPs: content/BPIP-3.md

     * Caller must have PROTOCOL role.
     *
     * Reverts if:
     * - Start id is not greater than zero for the first range

>      * - Start id is not greater than the end id of the previous range for subsequent ranges

Author: This reflects the truth. We just enforce that tokenIds as strictly increasing, but there can be gaps between ranges.

     */
    function reserveRange(uint256 _offerId, uint256 _length) external;
```
#### IBosonOrchestrationHandler
For convenience, all orchestration methods that allow offer creation, get a counterpart method that allow range reservation at the same time. Seller needs to provide an additional input which tells how many vouchers can be preminted. New methods are
These methods are not essential for this BPIP, so full specification is not provided. Revert reasons, events emitted and input parameters are union of revert reasons, events emitted and input parameters of base functions, combined in given orchestration function. List of suggested orchestration methods:
- createSellerAndPremintedOffer
- createPremintedOfferWithCondition
- createPremintedOfferAddToGroup
- createPremintedOfferAndTwinWithBundle
- createPremintedOfferWithConditionAndTwinAndBundle
- createSellerAndPremintedOfferWithCondition
- createSellerAndPremintedOfferAndTwinWithBundle
- createSellerAndPremintedOfferWithConditionAndTwinAndBundle

## Interactions 
![Pre-minted Vouchers Interactions Diagram](./assets/bpip-3/Preminted-Vouchers-Diagram.png "Pre-minted Voucher Sequences Diagram")

## Rationale

> Vouchers, which are ERC721 NFTs, show on marketplaces as soon as they are minted. Currently, vouchers are minted at the same time when an exchange is created, which means that whenever they are resold on a secondary market, the new buyer does not get full dispute period (i.e. transfer does not reset the timers in the protocol). In order to allow buyers on any marketplace to get full dispute period when they are the first owner of the voucher, we need a different solution. 

Author: Yes, that is wrong, it should be redemption period.

Another approach was to enable mint on demand directly on voucher contract. Although it does not suffer the same limitations as the previous approach, mint is not a standard ERC721 function, so compatibility with all marketplaces would be hard to achieve.

This leads to this proposal, where vouchers are preminted directly on existing voucher contract. Their existence automatically means they can be transferred as regular ERC721 NFTs, so they can be sold on any marketplace. Compared to the first approach, the voucher here is not burned but simply transferred to a new owner (i.e. first buyer). This first transfer invokes `commitToPremintedOffer` on the protocol, which starts the exchange and effectively converts preminted voucher into a true voucher. After that, the voucher behaves as other vouchers, i.e. dispute period starts at the time of the purchase, the voucher can be redeemed, transferred, etc.
Important to note here is that we now have two types of vouchers in the voucher contract:
- preminted vouchers, with no exchange associated and
- true vouchers, with exactly one exchange associated.
  

> In current protocol, all vouchers are issued when the protocol invokes `issueVoucher` method. In this proposal, we add an additional method `preMint` which allows the seller (operator) to issue a desired number of vouchers.

Author: Changed.

Since currently it holds that the exchange id (in the protocol) always matches the token id (in voucher contract), it's desired that this stays even with premint. To achieve it, we propose a method to reserve range (`reserveRange`), which effectively reserves a desired number of exchange ids in the protocol. Then whenever a preminted voucher is converted into a true voucher, it keeps its token id and gets the matching exchange id in the protocol.

> Although range reservation ultimately happens on voucher contracts, the method must be invoked true protocol. That way, it can be ensured that the amount of preminted vouchers never exceeds the quantity available, set in the offer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although range reservation ultimately happens via voucher contracts, the method must be invoked through the protocol. That way, it can be ensured that the amount of preminted vouchers never exceeds the quantity available, set in the offer.
```

> If the offer expires or is voided, it currently means that buyers cannot commit to it anymore. However, with preminted vouchers, it's possible that some of them were not bought before that happened. In this case, the protocol should also prevent committing to the offer, which means that some unusable vouchers are stuck in the contract and possibly on marketplaces. To delist them, we suggest a method to burn all preminted vouchers (`burnPremintedVouchers`) that cannot be redeemed anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the offer expires or is voided buyers can no longer commit to them anymore. However, with preminted vouchers, it's possible that some of them were not bought before they are rendered useless. In this case, the protocol should also prevent committing to the offer via these pre-minted voucher. In this case some unusable vouchers will be stuck in the contract and possibly on marketplaces. To delist them, we suggest a method to burn all preminted vouchers (`burnPremintedVouchers`) that cannot be redeemed anymore.
```

> Given that now the buyer does not directly interact with the protocol, this opens the question of how to ensure protocol exchange guarantees (i.e. possibility of getting funds back if something goes wrong). The proposed solution is that now the seller needs to provide enough funds to cover both the item price and the seller deposit. This immediately ensures buyer protection but increases a seller's capital requirement a bit. However, this drawback is not too big, since as soon as the marketplace exchange happens, the seller receives the funds, which can be directly used to cover the item price in subsequent sales. Moreover, as soon as some exchanges are finalized and funds are released back into the seller's pool, those funds can be automatically used to cover future sales.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that with pre minted voucher the buyer does not directly interact with the protocol, this opens the question of how do we ensure the protocol's exchange guarantees (i.e. possibility of getting funds back if something goes wrong). The proposed solution is that now the seller needs to provide enough funds to cover both the item price and the seller deposit within the seller pool. This immediately ensures buyer protection but increases a seller's capital requirements. However, this drawback is not too big, since as soon as the marketplace exchange happens, the seller receives the funds, which can be directly used to cover the item price in subsequent sales. Moreover, as soon as some exchanges are finalized and funds are released back into the seller's pool, those funds can be automatically used to cover future sales.
```

> This proposal might rise some efficiency concerns about the solution efficiency, since minting ERC721 is relatively costly operation. ERC1155 was considered as alternative, but it turned out that with it it's impossible to maintain nice exchange id and token id equivalence. To overcome the problem of ERC721 inefficiency we propose another solution. Since premint always assign token ownership to voucher contract owner, there is no need to explicitly store it's address during the premint. It's enough that only correct transfer events are emitted, while general consistency is achieved by overriding ERC721 `ownerOf`, `transferFrom` and `safeTransferFrom` methods to correctly manage all tokens that were preminted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal might raise some efficiency concerns about the solution efficiency since minting ERC721 is a relatively costly operation. ERC1155 was considered as an alternative, but it turned out that with it it's impossible to maintain a nice exchange id and token id equivalence. To overcome the problem of ERC721 inefficiency, we propose another solution. Since premint always assigns token ownership to the voucher contract owner, there is no need to explicitly store its address during the premint. It's enough that only correct transfer events are emitted, while general consistency is achieved by overriding ERC721 `ownerOf`, `transferFrom` and `safeTransferFrom` methods to correctly manage all tokens that were preminted.
```

> This proposal might raise some efficiency concerns about the solution efficiency since minting ERC721 is a relatively costly operation. ERC1155 was considered as an alternative, but it turned out that with it it's impossible to maintain a nice exchange id and token id equivalence. To overcome the problem of ERC721 inefficiency, we propose another solution. Since premint always assigns token ownership to the voucher contract owner, there is no need to explicitly store its address during the premint. It's enough that only correct transfer events are emitted, while general consistency is achieved by overriding ERC721 `ownerOf`, `transferFrom` and `safeTransferFrom` methods to correctly manage all tokens that were preminted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal might raise some efficiency concerns around the minting of multiple ERC721s, as these are relatively costly operations. ERC1155 was considered as an alternative, but it turned out that with it it's impossible to maintain a nice exchange id and token id equivalence. To overcome the problem of ERC721 inefficiency, we proposed another solution. Since premint always assigns token ownership to the voucher contract owner (or to the contract itself), there is no need to explicitly store its address during the premint phase (saving massively on storage costs). It's enough that only correct transfer events are emitted, while general consistency is achieved by overriding ERC721 `ownerOf`, `transferFrom` and `safeTransferFrom` methods to correctly manage all tokens that were preminted.
```

## Backward compatibility
This specification does not break backward compatibility.

> Still it is important that when upgrade is done voucher contracts are upgraded before the protocol is upgraded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Still it is important that when the upgrade is done, voucher contracts are upgraded before the protocol is upgraded.
```

## Implementation
### BosonVoucher

* Range reservation
  * Must be done before preminting can happen.

>   * Ranges must be strictly increasing, i.e. start of new range must be greater than current highest range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Ranges must be strictly increasing, i.e. start of a new range must be greater than the current highest range.
```

>   * Store information about associated offer id, range start and range length.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Store information about the associated offer id, range start, and range length.
```

>   * Ranges must be strictly increasing, i.e. start of a new range must be greater than the current highest range.

Reviewer: And contiguous ?

Author: No, there can be gaps.

>   * Store information about the associated offer id, range start, and range length.

Reviewer: And the address `_to` of who the owner is (i.e. contract or contract owner)

Author: Added

  * The tracking of reserved ranges enables that exchange id (in protocol) and token id (voucher contract) can remain the same.
* Preminting

>   * Can be done in batches. This allows to premint the quantities that could otherwise not be possible because of the block gas limit. Additionally it allows seller, to only partially release vouchers to the market.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Can be done in batches. This allows to premint the quantities that could otherwise not be possible because of the block gas limit. Additionally, it allows sellers to only partially release vouchers to the market.
```

>   * Preminting is always done to contract owner's address. It emits events that look as if vouchers have been minted, but don't store the owner address to conserve the bulk of an actual minting's gas. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Preminting is always done to the contract owner's address. It emits events that look as if vouchers have been minted, but don't store the owner's address to conserve the bulk of an actual minting's gas. 
```

  * Preminting always mints consecutive token ids, starting with the lowest non-minted id in the range.
* Token ownership

>   * Change ERC721 method `ownerOf`, so it properly reports the owner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Change ERC721 method `ownerOf`, so it properly reports the correct owner.
```

>   * If token id is in a reserved range, has already been preminted, but not yet transferred or burned, report the contract owner (the seller) as the owner of the voucher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If the token id is in a reserved range, and has already been preminted, but not yet transferred or burned, report the contract owner (the seller) as the owner of the voucher.
```

>   * In other cases return true owner if exists, or revert otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * In other cases, return the true owner if it exists, or revert otherwise.
```

* Preminted voucher transfer
  * When preminted voucher is transferred for the first time, detect it in before transfer hook it and call the commitToPremintedOffer protocol method, which does not require payment.
  * In all subsequent transfers, treat voucher as normal, i.e. call onVoucherTransferred protocol method.
  * Since all inhered transfer methods (transferFrom and safeTranferFrom) revert if token id has no owner, it needs to be temporary updated whenever first transfer of preminted voucher.
* Burn preminted vouchers
  * Preminted vouchers can be burned when offer expires or is voided.
  * Burning allows owner to removed unusable vouchers from their wallet.

* Implemented [here](https://github.com/bosonprotocol/boson-protocol-contracts/pull/483).

### Protocol

> Offer creation remains the same as it was in previous versions. To enable preminted vouchers for an offer, seller just needs to call reserveRange method in the protocol, which effectively converts offer into a (partially) preminted offer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Offer creation remains the same as it was in previous versions. To enable preminted vouchers for an offer, the seller just needs to call the `reserveRange` method in the protocol, which effectively converts the offer into a (partially) preminted offer.
```

Offer can be
  - fully preminted: reserved range matches initial quantity available. It makes it impossible to commit to offer directly.
  - partially preminted: reserved range is less than quantity available. It is possible to commit to offer directly on the protocol or through primary transfer of a preminted voucher.

>   - not preminted: there is no reserved range for the offer. The only way to commit is directly on the protocol (same as in current version of the protocol).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - not preminted: there is no reserved range for the offer. The only way to commit is directly on the protocol (same as in the current protocol version).
```

> Reserve range can be called once per offer, so seller must in advance decide how may vouchers can be preminted. Reserve range accepts only offer id and range length, while range start is determined based on current exchange id. Calling reserve range decreases quantity available and increases exchange id counter in the protocol. This means than it is now possible that exchange with higher id is created before the exchange with lower id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reserve range can be called once per offer, so the seller must in advance decide how many vouchers can be preminted. Reserve range accepts only the offer id and range length, while range start is determined based on the current exchange id. Calling `reserveRange` decreases the quantity available and increases the exchange id counter in the protocol. This means that it is now possible that the exchange with a higher id is created before the exchange with a lower id.
```

> Decision if offer will support preminted vouchers or not does not need to be decided at offer creation time. Even is some user already commit to an offer, seller can reserve a range, as long as quantity available is greater than 0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The decision if the offer will support preminted vouchers or not does not need to be decided at offer creation time. Even if some users already commit to an offer, the seller can reserve a range, as long as the quantity available is greater than 0.
```
